:book: Migration doc (#895)
kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder: docs/book/src/migration/guide.md

# Migration Guide

> This document describes how to migrate a project from kubebuilder v1 to v2.

Reviewer: Lang: this should be self-evident.  If it's not, the title's not doing its job.  You probably want to change the title.

Additional benefit of a more specific title: it allows us to easily add more if we need them in the future.

Reviewer: Add a note about how this conversion will end up with a project that looks like a native v2 project -- in some cases it's possible to migrate without as much copy-pasting if you're willing to settle

> We suggest you read [this doc](./v1vsv2.md) that compares the notable differences between v1 and v2.

Reviewer: Lang: Change to a more imperative sentence structure: `Make you understand the [differences between KubeBuilder v1 and v2](...)  before continuing`

The recommended way of migration is to create a new v2 project and copy the business logic code.

> Please ensure you have followed the [installation guide](../quick-start.md#installation) to install the required

Reviewer: use absolute paths when referencing unrelated parent elements -- it makes it more obvious here

components.

> We have an [example v1 project](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/tree/master/docs/book/src/migration/testdata/gopath/project). It should look like the

Reviewer: move these into reference-style links to make the source more readable:

```markdown

We have an [example v1 project][v1-project]

[v1-project]: https://github.com/...
````

Reviewer: Lang: We've been writing our tutorials in a more conversational tone, so this should probably read like

> Let's take the [example v1 project][v1-project] and migrate it to KubeBuilder v2.
> At the end, we should have something that looks like the [example v2 project][v2-project].

[v2 project in the cronjob tutorial](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/tree/master/docs/book/src/cronjob-tutorial/testdata/project) after the migration.

## Preparation

> First, we need to figure out what are the domain, group, version and kind for kubebuilder.

Reviewer: Lang: this reads awkwardly.  Generally, we say `what the XYZ are` when not asking something:

> What are the group, version, and domain?
> We'll need to figure out what the group, version, and domain are.

> In your kubebuilder v1 project, the `pkg` directory should look like this.

Reviewer: Lang: we should try not to switch between `your` and `our`.

Reviewer: Also, since we're following a canonical thing, we can say

> Let's take a look at our current project structure:

```
pkg/
├── apis
│   ├── addtoscheme_{your-group}_{your-version}.go
│   ├── apis.go
│   └── {your-group}
│       ├── group.go
│       └── {your-version}
│           ├── {your-kind-in-lower-case}_types.go
│           ├── {your-kind-in-lower-case}_types_test.go
│           ├── doc.go
│           ├── register.go
│           ├── {your-version}_suite_test.go
│           └── zz_generated.deepcopy.go
├── controller
└── webhook
```

> In `register.go`, you can find something like

Reviewer: Lang: `we` (going to stop leaving these after this -- just fix them all)

Reviewer: Lang: construct this like we're figuring it out together:

> All of our API information is stored in the `pkg/apis/<whatever-the-sample-group-is>`, so we can look there to find what we need to know.

etc

```go
SchemeGroupVersion = schema.GroupVersion{Group: {your-group}.{your-domain}, Version: {your-version}}
```

> Now you have figured out what are your domain, group, version and kind.

Reviewer: ditto here wrt to `are`

> ## Initialize the Project

Reviewer: Write this like a step-by-step conversation -- 

> Now that we blah blah blah, we'll need to blah blah blah

(don't use that exact phrasing everywhere, or it'll become repetitive, though)

Run the following command

> 

Author: Added a small section to cover this.

```bash
kubebuilder init --domain {your-domain}
```

## Migrate API and Controller

> Run the following command to scaffold the API and the controller. Please follow the prompt to scaffold the API and (or)

Reviewer: ditto here for the conversational tone and specific example:

> Next, we'll re-scaffold out the controller and API types.  SInce we want both, we'll say yes to both the API and controller prompts when asked what parts we want to scaffold:

the controller.

```bash
kubebuilder create api --group {your-group} --version {your-version} --kind {Your-kind}
```

You can run it multiple times if you have more than one API and controller. If you need multiple groups, please follow

> [this document](../TODO.md)

Reviewer: Just note that this isn't normally supported yet, and you'll have to do some manual work.

### Migrate the API

Now copy your API definition from `pkg/apis/{your-group}/{your-version}/{your-kind}_types.go` to
`api/{your-version}/{your-kind}_types.go`. You only need to copy the implementation of your `Spec` and `Status`.

You don't need to copy these markers from v1 project

```go
// +genclient
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// +k8s:openapi-gen=true
```

You need to ensure marker `// +kubebuilder:object:root=true` exists in v2 project and is the 2nd closest comment for

> your root object. e.g. `CronJob` and `CronJobList`

Reviewer: be more concrete, otherwise this seems like an arcane incantation --

> we can replace the `+k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces` marker with `+kubebuilder:object:root=true`.

etc

```go
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// CronJob is the Schema for the cronjobs API
type CronJob struct {...}
```

### Migrate the Controller

Now copy your controller implementation from `pkg/controller/{your-kind}/{your-kind}_controller.go`
to `controllers/{your-kind}_controller.go`.

Copy the fields from your old reconciler struct to the new one.

Copy the business logic code of `Reconcile` function.

Copy the rbac related [markers](../TODO.md) to the new controller file.

> Copy the code under `func add(mgr manager.Manager, r reconcile.Reconciler) error` to

Reviewer: show the example from the example

`SetupWithManager(mgr ctrl.Manager) error`.

> ## Migrate the Webhook

Reviewer: Lang: Webhooks (plural)

If you don't have a webhook, you can skip this section.

## Core Types and Foreign CRDs

> If you are using webhook for k8s core types (e.g. Pods) or for a CRD that is not owned by you, you can refer the

Reviewer: don't abbreviate `k8s`.

[controller-runtime example for builtin types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime/tree/master/examples/builtins)
and do something similar. Kubebuilder doesn't scaffold much for these cases, but you can use the library in
controller-runtime.

> ## Scaffold Webhooks

Reviewer: This title is confusing.  Insert a word or two (e.g. `for our CRDs`)

> Run the following command to scaffold the webhook for your CRD.

Reviewer: Lang: conversational tone

Specify `--defaulting` and `--programmatic-validation` flags as need.

```bash
kubebuilder create webhook --group {your-group} --version {your-version} --kind {Your-kind} --defaulting --programmatic-validation
```

> You can run it multiple times if you need multiple webhooks.

Author: If you have different webhooks for multiple kinds e.g. <batch, v1, CronJob> and <batch, v1, Job>, we need to run the command multiple times.

> ### Validating Webhooks

Reviewer: these headings feel redundant.  just remove these subheads and make this a single section.  For example:

> Now, we'll need to copy the logic for each webhook.  For validating webhooks, we can copy the contents of `func validating{...}Fn` to `ValidateCreate`, and similarly ... for defaulting webhooks.

Reviewer: they also seem to break up the flow -- I keep thinking I've hit the end, and finding more, and not knowing if it's part of the next section, or this one.

project that looks like a native v2 project. However, in some cases, it's
possible to do an in-place upgrade (i.e. reuse the v1 project layout, upgrading
controller-runtime and controller-tools.  

Let's take the [example v1 project][v1-project] and migrate it to Kubebuilder
v2. At the end, we should have something that looks like the
[example v2 project][v2-project].

## Preparation

We'll need to figure out what the group, version, kind and domain are.

Let's take a look at our current v1 project structure:

```
pkg/
├── apis
│   ├── addtoscheme_batch_v1.go
│   ├── apis.go
│   └── batch
│       ├── group.go
│       └── v1
│           ├── cronjob_types.go
│           ├── cronjob_types_test.go
│           ├── doc.go
│           ├── register.go
│           ├── v1_suite_test.go
│           └── zz_generated.deepcopy.go
├── controller
└── webhook
```

All of our API information is stored in `pkg/apis/batch`, so we can look
there to find what we need to know.

In `cronjob_types.go`, we can find

```go
type CronJob struct {...}
```

In `register.go`, we can find

```go
SchemeGroupVersion = schema.GroupVersion{Group: "batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io", Version: "v1"}
```

> Putting that together, we get `CronJob` as the type, and `batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io/v1` as the group-version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting that together, we get `CronJob` as the kind, and `batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io/v1` as the group-version
```

> Putting that together, we get `CronJob` as the type, and `batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io/v1` as the group-version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting that together, we get `CronJob` as the kind, and `batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io/v1` as the group-version
```

## Initialize a v2 Project

Now, we need to initialize a v2 project.  Before we do that, though, we'll need
to initialize a new go module if we're not on the `gopath`:

```bash
go mod init tutorial.kubebuilder.io/project
```

Then, we can finish initializing the project with kubebuilder:

```bash
kubebuilder init --domain tutorial.kubebuilder.io
```

## Migrate APIs and Controllers

Next, we'll re-scaffold out the API types and controllers. Since we want both,
we'll say yes to both the API and controller prompts when asked what parts we
want to scaffold:

```bash
kubebuilder create api --group batch --version v1 --kind CronJob
```

If you're using multiple groups, some manual work is required to migrate.

> Please follow [this][TODO-multi-group-doc] for more details.

Reviewer: leave this as `/TODO.md` so we get our standard note.

### Migrate the APIs

Now, let's copy the API definition from `pkg/apis/batch/v1/cronjob_types.go` to
`api/v1/cronjob_types.go`. We only need to copy the implementation of the `Spec`
and `Status` fields.

We can replace the `+k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=...` marker (which is
[deprecated in kubebuilder](/reference/markers/object.md)) with
`+kubebuilder:object:root=true`.

> We don't need the following markers any more:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't need the following markers any more (they're not used anymore, and are relics from much older versions of KubeBuilder):
```

```go
// +genclient

> // +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: (you mention this above)

type CronJobList struct {...}
```

### Migrate the Controllers

Now, let's migrate the controller reconciler code from
`pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller.go` to
`controllers/cronjob_controller.go`.

We'll need to copy
- the fields from the `ReconcileCronJob` struct to `CronJobReconciler`
- the contents of the `Reconcile` function
- the [rbac related markers](/reference/markers/rbac.md) to the new file.
- the code under `func add(mgr manager.Manager, r reconcile.Reconciler) error`
to `func SetupWithManager`

## Migrate the Webhooks

If you don't have a webhook, you can skip this section.

### Webhooks for Core Types and External CRDs

If you are using webhooks for Kubernetes core types (e.g. Pods), or for an
external CRD that is not owned by you, you can refer the
[controller-runtime example for builtin types][builtin-type-example]
and do something similar. Kubebuilder doesn't scaffold much for these cases, but
you can use the library in controller-runtime.

### Scaffold Webhooks for our CRDs

Now let's scaffold the webhooks for our CRD (CronJob). We'll need to run the
following command with the `--defaulting` and `--programmatic-validation` flags

> as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(since our test project uses defaulting and validating webhooks):
```

to `func ValidateCreate` in `api/v1/cronjob_webhook.go` and then the same for `update`.

Similarly, we'll copy from `func mutatingCronJobFn` to `func Default`.

### Webhook Markers

When scaffolding webhooks, Kubebuilder v2 adds the following markers:

```
// These are v2 markers

// This is for the mutating webhook
// +kubebuilder:webhook:path=/mutate-batch-tutorial-kubebuilder-io-v1-cronjob,mutating=true,failurePolicy=fail,groups=batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io,resources=cronjobs,verbs=create;update,versions=v1,name=mcronjob.kb.io

...

// This is for the validating webhook
// +kubebuilder:webhook:path=/validate-batch-tutorial-kubebuilder-io-v1-cronjob,mutating=false,failurePolicy=fail,groups=batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io,resources=cronjobs,verbs=create;update,versions=v1,name=vcronjob.kb.io
```

The default verbs are `verbs=create;update`. We need to ensure `verbs` matches
what we need. For example, if we only want to validate creation, then we would
change it to `verbs=create`.

We also need to ensure `failure-policy` is still the same.

We don't need to change or copy others markers. We may have some markers like

> the following in v1. We don't need them any more in v2 (they deal with

Reviewer: Markers like the following are no longer needed (they deal with ...):

self-deploying certificate configuration, which was removed in v2).

```go
// v1 markers
// +kubebuilder:webhook:port=9876,cert-dir=/tmp/cert
// +kubebuilder:webhook:service=test-system:webhook-service,selector=app:webhook-server
// +kubebuilder:webhook:secret=test-system:webhook-server-secret
// +kubebuilder:webhook:mutating-webhook-config-name=test-mutating-webhook-cfg
// +kubebuilder:webhook:validating-webhook-config-name=test-validating-webhook-cfg
```

In v1, a single webhook marker may be split into multiple ones in the same

> paragram. In v2, each webhook must be represented by a single marker.

Reviewer: sp?

# Migration from v1 to v2

> Make ensure you understand the [differences between Kubebuilder v1 and v2](./v1vsv2.md)

Reviewer: either "Make sure" or "Ensure" (both "make" and "ensure" are verbs)

before continuing

Please ensure you have followed the [installation guide](/quick-start.md#installation)
to install the required components.

The recommended way to migrate a v1 project is to create a new v2 project and
copy over the API and the reconciliation code. The conversion will end up with a
project that looks like a native v2 project. However, in some cases, it's

> possible to do a in-place upgrade. i.e. reuse the v1 project layout and only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible to do an in-place upgrade (i.e. reuse the v1 project layout, upgrading
controller-runtime and controller-tools in place then tweaking the code).
```

upgrade controller-runtime and controller-tools.  

Let's take the [example v1 project][v1-project] and migrate it to Kubebuilder
v2. At the end, we should have something that looks like the
[example v2 project][v2-project].

## Preparation

> What are the group, version, kind and domain? We'll need to figure out what the

Reviewer: No need for the first question -- you can just say `First, we'll need to figure out ...` without the `What are the ...`:

```suggestion
First, we'll need to figure out what the
```

group, version, kind and domain are.

Let's take a look at our current v1 project structure:

```
pkg/
├── apis
│   ├── addtoscheme_batch_v1.go
│   ├── apis.go
│   └── batch
│       ├── group.go
│       └── v1
│           ├── cronjob_types.go
│           ├── cronjob_types_test.go
│           ├── doc.go
│           ├── register.go
│           ├── v1_suite_test.go
│           └── zz_generated.deepcopy.go
├── controller
└── webhook
```

> All of our API information is stored in the `pkg/apis/batch`, so we can look

Reviewer: > in the `pkg/apis/batch` package

or 

> in `pkg/apis/batch`

there to find what we need to know.

In `cronjob_types.go`, we can find

```go
type CronJob struct {...}
```

In `register.go`, we can find

```go
SchemeGroupVersion = schema.GroupVersion{Group: "batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io", Version: "v1"}
```

> Now we have figured out what the group, version, kind and domain are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting that together, we get `CronJob` as the type, and `batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io/v1` as the group-version:
```

- domain: tutorial.kubebuilder.io
- group: batch
- version: v1
- kind: CronJob

## Initialize a v2 Project

> Now that we initialize a v2 project, we'll need to first initialize the go

Reviewer: it's not clear what you're trying to say here.  If you want to use the present tense, you'll need to use the "present progressive" (I had to look up the name on that one :-P) tense -- `Now that we're initializing a v2 project`.

However, I feel like this feels better as

```suggestion
Now, we need to initialize a v2 project.  Before we do that, though, we'll need to initialize a new go module:
```

(side note: maybe say `initialize a new go module if we're not on the gopath`)

modules.

```bash
go mod init tutorial.kubebuilder.io/project
```

> Then we finish initializing the project with kubebuilder.

Reviewer: while gramatically correct, this is a bit of an awkward construction -- it's generally only used in cooking shows, painting tutorials, etc.

I'd use

```suggestion
Then, we can finish initializing the project with kubebuilder:
```

or just

```suggestion
Then, we can initialize the project with kubebuilder:
```

```bash
kubebuilder init --domain tutorial.kubebuilder.io
```

## Migrate APIs and Controllers

Next, we'll re-scaffold out the API types and controllers. Since we want both,
we'll say yes to both the API and controller prompts when asked what parts we
want to scaffold:

```bash
kubebuilder create api --group batch --version v1 --kind CronJob
```

> If using multiple groups, it will require some manual work. Please follow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using multiple groups, some manual work is required to migrate.  Please follow
```

[this][TODO-multi-group-doc] for more details.

### Migrate the APIs

> Now let's copy the API definition from `pkg/apis/batch/v1/cronjob_types.go` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's copy the API definition from `pkg/apis/batch/v1/cronjob_types.go` to
```

`api/v1/cronjob_types.go`. We only need to copy the implementation of the `Spec`
and `Status` fields.

> We can replace the `+k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces` marker with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can replace the `+k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=...` marker (which is [deprecated in kubebuilder](/reference/markers/object.md)) with
`+kubebuilder:object:root=true`.
```

`+kubebuilder:object:root=true`.

> We don't need the following markers any more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't need the following markers any more:
```

(usually you use a colon to when you introduce something with "the following")

```go
// +genclient
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// +k8s:openapi-gen=true
```

> Our API types should look like the following.

Reviewer: ditto here

```go
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// CronJob is the Schema for the cronjobs API
type CronJob struct {...}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// CronJobList contains a list of CronJob
type CronJobList struct {...}
```

### Migrate the Controllers

> Now let's copy the controller reconciler code from

Reviewer: comma after now (like before)

`pkg/controller/cronjob/cronjob_controller.go` to
`controllers/cronjob_controller.go`.

> - Copy the fields from `ReconcileCronJob` struct to `CronJobReconciler`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll need to copy

- the fields from the `ReconcileCronJob` struct to `CronJobReconciler`
- the contents of the `Reconcile` function
- the [rbac related markers](/reference/markers/rbac.md) to the new file.
- the code under `func add(mgr manager.Manager, r reconcile.Reconciler) error` to `func SetupWithManager`
```

- Copy the reconciler code of `Reconcile` function.
- Copy the [rbac related markers](/reference/markers/rbac.md) to the new file.
- Copy the code under `func add(mgr manager.Manager, r reconcile.Reconciler) error`
to `func SetupWithManager`.

## Migrate the Webhooks

If you don't have a webhook, you can skip this section.

> ### Core Types and External CRDs

Reviewer: these subheadings are a bit confusing IMO -- I'd prepend `Webhook` to all of them (`Webhooks for Core Types`, `Webhook Markers`, etc)

> If you are using webhook for kubernetes core types (e.g. Pods) or for an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using webhooks for core Kubernetes types (e.g. Pods), or for an
```

external CRD that is not owned by you, you can refer the
[controller-runtime example for builtin types][builtin-type-example]
and do something similar. Kubebuilder doesn't scaffold much for these cases, but
you can use the library in controller-runtime.

### Scaffold Webhooks for our CRDs

> Now let's scaffold the webhooks, we'll need to run the following command with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's scaffold the webhooks for our CRD (CronJob).  We'll need to run the following command with
```

> `--defaulting` and `--programmatic-validation` flags as need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `--defaulting` and `--programmatic-validation` flags as needed:
```

```bash
kubebuilder create webhook --group batch --version v1 --kind CronJob --defaulting --programmatic-validation
```

Depending on how many CRDs need webhooks, we may need to run the above command

> multiple times with different Group, Version and Kind.

Reviewer: oxford comma (`Group, Version, and Kind`), although this whole construction is a bit awkward with the plurality, so I'd use

```suggestion
multiple times with different Group-Version-Kinds.
```

Now, we'll need to copy the logic for each webhook. For validating webhooks, we
can copy the contents from
`func validatingCronJobFn` in `pkg/default_server/cronjob/validating/cronjob_create_handler.go`

> to `func ValidateCreate` in `api/v1/cronjob_webhook.go`. Similar for `update`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to `func ValidateCreate` in `api/v1/cronjob_webhook.go`, and then the same for `update`.
```

Similarly, we'll copy from `func mutatingCronJobFn` to `func Default`.

### Markers

> By default, v2 project will have markers formatted as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When scaffolding webhooks, Kubebuilder v2 adds the following markers:
```

```
// These are v2 markers

> // This is for mutating webhook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This is for the mutating webhook
```

// +kubebuilder:webhook:path=/mutate-batch-tutorial-kubebuilder-io-v1-cronjob,mutating=true,failurePolicy=fail,groups=batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io,resources=cronjobs,verbs=create;update,versions=v1,name=mcronjob.kb.io

...

> // This is for validating webhook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This is for the validating webhook
```

// +kubebuilder:webhook:path=/validate-batch-tutorial-kubebuilder-io-v1-cronjob,mutating=false,failurePolicy=fail,groups=batch.tutorial.kubebuilder.io,resources=cronjobs,verbs=create;update,versions=v1,name=vcronjob.kb.io
```

> Default verbs are `verbs=create;update`. We need to ensure `verbs` matches what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default verbs are `verbs=create;update`. We need to ensure `verbs` matches what
```

> we need. For example, if we only want to validate creation, then change it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we need. For example, if we only want to validate creation, then we would change it to
```

`verbs=create`.

We also need to ensure `failure-policy` is still the same.

We don't need to change or copy others markers. We may have some markers like

> the following in v1. We don't need them any more in v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following in v1. We don't need them any more in v2 (they deal with self-deploying certificate configuration, which was removed in v2).
```

```go
// v1 markers
// +kubebuilder:webhook:port=9876,cert-dir=/tmp/cert
// +kubebuilder:webhook:service=test-system:webhook-service,selector=app:webhook-server
// +kubebuilder:webhook:secret=test-system:webhook-server-secret
// +kubebuilder:webhook:mutating-webhook-config-name=test-mutating-webhook-cfg
// +kubebuilder:webhook:validating-webhook-config-name=test-validating-webhook-cfg
```

> In v1, webhook markers can span multiple lines. In v2, they must be in the same line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In v1, a single webhook marker may be split into multiple ones in the same paragram. In v2, each webhook must be represented by a single marker.
```

## Others

If there are any manual updates in `main.go` in v1, we need to port the changes

> to the new `main.go`. You need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the new `main.go`. We'll also need to ensure all of the needed schemes have been
```
